23.x — Chapter 23 summary and quiz
In this chapter, we learned about some different kinds of relationships between two objects.

Summary

**Summary**
The process of building complex objects from simpler ones is called object composition. There are two types of object composition: composition, and aggregation.

The process of building complex objects from simpler ones is called
**object composition**
. There are two types of object composition: composition, and aggregation.
Composition exists when a member of a class has a part-of relationship with the class. In a composition relationship, the class manages the existence of the members. To qualify as a composition, an object and a part must have the following relationship:

**Composition**
exists when a member of a class has a part-of relationship with the class. In a composition relationship, the class manages the existence of the members. To qualify as a
**composition**
, an object and a part must have the following relationship:
- The part (member) is part of the object (class)
- The part (member) can only belong to one object (class) at a time
- The part (member) has its existence managed by the object (class)
- The part (member) does not know about the existence of the object (class)

The part (member) is part of the object (class)
The part (member) can only belong to one object (class) at a time
The part (member) has its existence managed by the object (class)
The part (member) does not know about the existence of the object (class)
Compositions are typically implemented via normal member variables, or by pointers where the class manages all the memory allocation and deallocation. If you can implement a class as a composition, you should implement a class as a composition.

Aggregations exists when a class has a has-a relationship with the member. In an aggregation relationship, the class does not manage the existence of the members. To qualify as an aggregation, an object and its parts must have the following relationship:

**Aggregations**
exists when a class has a has-a relationship with the member. In an aggregation relationship, the class does not manage the existence of the members. To qualify as an
**aggregation**
, an object and its parts must have the following relationship:
- The part (member) is part of the object (class)
- The part (member) can belong to more than one object (class) at a time
- The part (member) does not have its existence managed by the object (class)
- The part (member) does not know about the existence of the object (class)

The part (member) is part of the object (class)
The part (member) can belong to more than one object (class) at a time
The part (member) does
*not*
have its existence managed by the object (class)
The part (member) does not know about the existence of the object (class)
Aggregations are typically implemented via pointer or reference.

Associations are a looser type of relationship, where the class uses-an otherwise unrelated object. To qualify as an association, an object and an associated object must have the following relationship:

**Associations**
are a looser type of relationship, where the class uses-an otherwise unrelated object. To qualify as an
**association**
, an object and an associated object must have the following relationship:
- The associated object (member) is otherwise unrelated to the object (class)
- The associated object (member) can belong to more than one object (class) at a time
- The associated object (member) does not have its existence managed by the object (class)
- The associated object (member) may or may not know about the existence of the object (class)

The associated object (member) is otherwise unrelated to the object (class)
The associated object (member) can belong to more than one object (class) at a time
The associated object (member) does
*not*
have its existence managed by the object (class)
The associated object (member) may or may not know about the existence of the object (class)
Associations may be implemented via pointer or reference, or by a more indirect means (such as holding the index or key of the associated object).

In a dependency, one class uses another class to perform a task. The dependent class typically is not a member of the class using it, but rather is temporarily created, used, and then destroyed, or passed into a member function from an external source.

In a
**dependency**
, one class uses another class to perform a task. The dependent class typically is not a member of the class using it, but rather is temporarily created, used, and then destroyed, or passed into a member function from an external source.
In a container class one class provides a container to hold multiple objects of another type. A value container is a composition that stores copies of the objects it is holding. A reference container is an aggregation that stores pointers or references to objects that live outside the container.

In a
**container class**
one class provides a container to hold multiple objects of another type. A
**value container**
is a composition that stores copies of the objects it is holding. A
**reference container**
is an aggregation that stores pointers or references to objects that live outside the container.
std::initializer_list can be used to implement constructors, assignment operators, and other functions that accept a list initialization parameter. std::initializer_list lives in the <initializer_list> header.

Property\Type | Composition | Aggregation | Association | Dependency
Relationship type | Whole/part | Whole/part | Otherwise unrelated | Otherwise unrelated
Members can belong to multiple classes | No | Yes | Yes | Yes
Members existence managed by class | Yes | No | No | No
Directionality | Unidirectional | Unidirectional | Unidirectional or bidirectional | Unidirectional
Relationship verb | Part-of | Has-a | Uses-a | Depends-on

Property\Type
Composition
Aggregation
Association
Dependency
Relationship type
Whole/part
Otherwise unrelated
Members can belong to multiple classes
No
Yes
Members existence managed by class
Yes
No
Directionality
Unidirectional
Unidirectional or bidirectional
Unidirectional
Relationship verb
Part-of
Has-a
Uses-a
Depends-on
Quiz time

**Quiz time**
This chapter is pretty straightforward and a little more abstract than the previous ones, so this quiz will be short and to the point.

1. What type of relationship (composition, aggregation, association, or dependency) do the following describe?

What type of relationship (composition, aggregation, association, or dependency) do the following describe?
1a) An Animal class that contains an animal type (enum) and name (string). Show Solution

Composition -- The animal type and name don’t have a use outside of the Animal.
1b) A text editor class with a save() function that takes a File object as an argument. The save() function writes the contents of the editor to disk. Show Solution

Dependency -- The text editor class is using the File object for the task of saving to disk.
1c) An Adventurer class that can carry various kinds of Items, such as swords, wands, potions, or spellbooks. These Items can be dropped and picked up by other Adventurers. Show Solution

Association -- the Adventurer and Items aren’t a whole-part relationship, so this isn’t an aggregation. The Adventurer uses-a Items, and doesn’t manage their existence.
1d) The Player prays at a Shrine (to receive a new power). Show Solution

Dependency -- They player depends on the shrine to receive the power, but does not have any long-term association with it.
1e) A Computer class that contains a CPU class. The CPU can be removed from the Computer and tested on its own. Show Solution

Aggregation -- The computer has a CPU, but does not manage its existence.
1f) A blacksmith has a specific anvil that he uses to do his work. Show Solution

Association -- The blacksmith uses the anvil, but does not have a whole-part relationship with it.
1. Select one: If you can design a class using (pick one: composition, aggregation, association, or dependency), then you should.

composition
[[Next lesson 24.1Introduction to inheritance]]
Next lesson
24.1
Introduction to inheritance
[Back to table of contents](/)
[[Previous lesson 23.7std::initializer_list]]
Previous lesson
23.7
std::initializer_list