# 4.2 — Void

Void is the easiest of the data types to explain. Basically, void means “no type”!

Void is our first example of an incomplete type. ==An **incomplete type** is a type that has been declared but not yet defined==.

- The compiler knows about the existence of such types, but does not have enough information to determine how much memory to allocate for objects of that type.
`void`is intentionally incomplete since it represents the lack of a type, and thus cannot be defined.

Incomplete types can not be instantiated:
```cpp
void value; // won't work, variables can't be defined with incomplete type void
```

Void is typically used in several different contexts.

Most commonly, *void* is used to indicate that a function does not return a value:
```cpp
void writeValue(int x) // void here means no return value
{
    std::cout << "The value of x is: " << x << '\n';
    // no return statement, because this function doesn't return a value
}
```

<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">If you use a return statement to try to return a value in such a function, a compile error will result:</mark>

```cpp
void noReturn(int x) // void here means no return value
{
    std::cout << "The value of x is: " << x << '\n';

return 5; // error
}
```

On Visual Studio 2017, this produced the error:
```
error C2562: 'noReturn': 'void' function returning a value
```

Deprecated: Functions that do not take  parameters
In C, void is used as a way to indicate that a function does not take any parameters:

```cpp
int getValue(void) // void here means no parameters
{
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

return x;
}
```

Although this will compile in C++ (for backwards compatibility reasons), this use of keyword *void* is considered deprecated in C++. The following code is equivalent, and preferred in C++:
```cpp
int getValue() // empty function parameters is an implicit void
{
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

return x;
}
```

Best practice
==Use an empty parameter list instead of void to indicate that a function has no parameters.==

Use an empty parameter list instead of *void*
to indicate that a function has no parameters.

Other uses of void
The void keyword has a third (more advanced) use in C++ that we cover in section [19.5 -- Void pointers](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian%20Vault&file=C%2B%2B%2FChapter%2019%20-%20Dynamic%20Allocation%20(under%20construction)%2F19.5%20-%20Void%20pointers). Since we haven’t covered what a pointer is yet, you don’t need to worry about this case for now.

Let’s move on!
Next lesson 4.3 [Object sizes and the sizeof operator](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian%20Vault&file=C%2B%2B%2FChapter%204%20-%20Fundamental%20Data%20Types%2F4.3%20-%20Object%20sizes%20and%20the%20sizeof%20operator)