6.5 — The comma operator
Operator | Symbol | Form | Operation
Comma | , | x, y | Evaluate x then y, returns value of y

Operator
Symbol
Form
Operation
Comma
,
x, y
Evaluate x then y, returns value of y
The comma operator (,) allows you to evaluate multiple expressions wherever a single expression is allowed. The comma operator evaluates the left operand, then the right operand, and then returns the result of the right operand.

The
**comma operator (,)**
allows you to evaluate multiple expressions wherever a single expression is allowed. The comma operator evaluates the left operand, then the right operand, and then returns the result of the right operand.
For example:

For example:
```cpp

#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 1 };
    int y{ 2 };

std::cout << (++x, ++y) << '\n'; // increment x and y, evaluates to the right operand

return 0;
}
```

#include <iostream> int main() { int x{ 1 }; int y{ 2 }; std::cout << (++x, ++y) << '\n'; // increment x and y, evaluates to the right operand return 0; }

First the left operand of the comma operator is evaluated, which increments x from 1 to 2. Next, the right operand is evaluated, which increments y from 2 to 3. The comma operator returns the result of the right operand (3), which is subsequently printed to the console.

Note that comma has the lowest precedence of all the operators, even lower than assignment. Because of this, the following two lines of code do different things:
```cpp
z = (a, b); // evaluate (a, b) first to get result of b, then assign that value to variable z.
z = a, b; // evaluates as "(z = a), b", so z gets assigned the value of a, and b is evaluated and discarded.
```

z = (a, b); // evaluate (a, b) first to get result of b, then assign that value to variable z. z = a, b; // evaluates as "(z = a), b", so z gets assigned the value of a, and b is evaluated and discarded.
This makes the comma operator somewhat dangerous to use.

This makes the comma operator somewhat dangerous to use.
In almost every case, a statement written using the comma operator would be better written as separate statements. For example, the above code could be written as:

In almost every case, a statement written using the comma operator would be better written as separate statements. For example, the above code could be written as:
```cpp

#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 1 };
    int y{ 2 };

++x;
    std::cout << ++y << '\n';

return 0;
}
```

#include <iostream> int main() { int x{ 1 }; int y{ 2 }; ++x; std::cout << ++y << '\n'; return 0; }

Most programmers do not use the comma operator at all, with the single exception of inside for loops, where its use is fairly common. We discuss for loops in future lesson 8.10 -- For statements.

Best practice
Avoid using the comma operator, except within for loops.

Avoid using the comma operator, except within
*for loops*
.
Comma as a separator

Comma as a separator
In C++, the comma symbol is often used as a separator, and these uses do not invoke the comma operator. Some examples of separator commas:

In C++, the comma symbol is often used as a separator, and these uses do not invoke the comma operator. Some examples of separator commas:
```cpp
void foo(int x, int y) // Separator comma used to separate parameters in function definition
{
    add(x, y); // Separator comma used to separate arguments in function call
    constexpr int z{ 3 }, w{ 5 }; // Separator comma used to separate multiple variables being defined on the same line (don't do this)
}
```

void foo(int x, int y) // Separator comma used to separate parameters in function definition { add(x, y); // Separator comma used to separate arguments in function call constexpr int z{ 3 }, w{ 5 }; // Separator comma used to separate multiple variables being defined on the same line (don't do this) }
There is no need to avoid separator commas (except when declaring multiple variables, which you should not do).

There is no need to avoid separator commas (except when declaring multiple variables, which you should not do).
[Next lesson 6.6The conditional operator](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/the-conditional-operator/)
Next lesson
6.6
The conditional operator
[Back to table of contents](/)
[Previous lesson 6.4Increment/decrement operators, and side effects](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/increment-decrement-operators-and-side-effects/)
Previous lesson
6.4
Increment/decrement operators, and side effects